Abstract— Business process modeling is a valuable technique
helping organizations to specify their processes, to analyze their
structure and to improve their performance. Conventional
process modeling techniques are proven to be inefficient while
dealing with non-repetitive, knowledge-intensive processes such
as Case Management processes. In this work we use the MAP
notation to model a Mortgage Approval Process as defined in
Banking. To increase the navigability and practical value of map
models, we extend the MAP notation with the concepts of Roles,
Relations between roles, and Role Configuration Rules.
Keywords: Role ; Process model MAP
I. INTRODUCTION
In the modern economy, companies are more and more
interested in expanding their businesses and exploring new
markets. Proliferation of Information and Communication
Technologies (ICT) fosters collaboration and makes people
across the globe work together as they are sitting in one office.
Working cultures, local policies and regulations, however,
remain specific to a country or a region forcing the companies
to customize their processes for each particular case and to take
into account where and under which conditions the process is
executed) [1].
Business process modeling is a valuable technique helping
organizations to specify their processes, to analyze their
structure and to improve their performance. Conventional
techniques for business process modeling are imperative - they
encourage the early specification of the control flow [2][3][4].
Using these techniques, specification of numerous options and
variations in a process model related to its context of execution
becomes tedious if at all possible [5][6][7][8].
Similar problem statements have been identified and
studied in the area of process engineering.
For more than ten years process engineering remains a key
issue for the information system (IS) communities [9]. For
instance, [10] [11] [12] [13] show that an improved
development process leads to improved productivity of the
software systems industry and improves systems quality.
Similarly to a business process, IS development process
was traditionally organized into sequences of activities (e.g.,
“analysis,” “design,” “coding,” “testing”) [14] [15], with a
rigid control flow. Later on, these activity sequences were
replaced by values and practices [16] [17]. However, [18]
highlights that, in practice, IS engineers are faced with
countless methodical choices: they can choose to execute one
activity completely or partially, to combine aspects of two or
more different activities, or to ignore an activity. Thus,
decisions made through the IS development process should
reflect the situation at hand and help an IS engineer to specify
and enact a unique process adapted to this situation.
In response to this problem, several methodologies
supporting intentions have been developed [19] [20] [21].
Intention-oriented process modeling focuses on what the
process is intended to achieve (i.e. what is the reason behind
the process execution), instead of how it is going to achieve.
[22]. Nevertheless, many of these methodologies do not
employ the concept of intention/goal as an integral part of their
process model. These process models focus on how the process
is performed and externalize what the process is intended to
accomplish – the intention. In MAP process models, [21], in
contrast, the intentional level is used to guide engineers
through IS processes by dynamic choices of the executable
service sequences. Each time when an intention is realized, the
model suggests an executable service (or several alternative
services) that can be invoked on the next step. The resulting IS
development process is adaptive and flexible as it is
constructed dynamically following the situation.
In this paper we use the MAP methodology to model a
Mortgage Approval Process as defined in Banking. Providing a
flexible mechanism for flexible and customizable process
specification, original MAP notation, nevertheless, remains
restrictive: it does not allow us to specify roles for this process.
The concept of Role is a key concept in process modeling.
Roles are present in nearly all process models - they help the
modeler to structure the process model, by grouping the
responsibilities and answering the question “who does what?”.
IS designer, developer, stakeholder, decision-maker, client,
clerk – are all examples of roles. According to [27] the role is
the definition of an organizational intention shared by a
collection of users, all of whom having the same privileges and
obligations to a set of work processes in an organization. The
role is also the main concept for the representation of
cooperative processes. In other words, the role is the basic
block of the organization perspective [47], which reflects
information about the organizational structure and actors to
which the business process is intended. Roles can be
represented and used differently in process models depending
on the notation.
The original MAP meta-model presented in [21] does not
include the concept of Role. However, roles implicitly
participate in decision-making in all the levels of an
organizational process expressed by a map. For example, it can
be a specific role responsible for making a choice between
several alternatives in the map. The notion of role will then be
useful to explicitly define who can take the navigation
decisions. Roles can also be present in the description of an
executable service (e.g. some activities may be performed by
specific roles and only them). Therefore, in order to improve
guidance on maps, it is important to include the concept of role
into the MAP metamodel.
In this work we extend the MAP notation with the concepts
of Roles, Relations between roles, and Role Configuration
Rules. These modeling concepts were introduced as a part of
DeCo (Declarative Configurable Process Specification)
approach in [1]. This mechanism allows us to anticipate
abundant variations of context as, even within the same bank,
different agencies may have different stuffing and thus,
different distribution of responsibilities between employees. As
a result, different actors may be required/available to execute
the Mortgage Approval Process. We will demonstrate how
these variations can be incorporated within the same map.
The reminder of this paper has the following structure. In
Section 2 we discuss the related works and identify the
advantages of MAP applied to modeling case management
processes. We also explain the limitations of the existing MAP
notation and provide the rationale for its extension. In Section 3
we present an example of the Mortgage Approval Process and
explain the MAP meta-model on this example. In Section 4 we
extend the MAP notation with the mechanism to explicit Role
variability modeling. In Section 5 we present our conclusions
and discuss our future work.
II. RELATED WORK
A. Process flexibility
Business process modeling is a valuable technique helping
organizations to specify their business processes, analyze their
structure and improve their performance. Conventional
techniques for business process modeling are imperative - they
encourage the early specification of the control flow. However,
for certain forms of business processes the control flow cannot
be identified at design time.
One of the examples is a Case Management Process [25].
The case management process can be characterized as follows:
it (i) has a descriptive nature, (ii) varies largely depending on
its execution context, (iii) involves a lot of, often implicit,
decision making resulted from communication/ negotiation
among human actors, (iv) is based on the available/emerging
case-related knowledge [26]. For such processes, early
specification of the control flow is not only challenging but
also unnecessary and even harmful.
As advocated in [27] an unstructured (i.e. without
predefined control flow) process cannot be represented in
terms of flow of tasks or activities or operations... The model
proposed in [27] allows to represent it as a ‘black box’
associated to a set of resources that it uses and produces and a
set of participating roles. The key concept of such kind of
unstructured processes is the information and knowledge
sharing in the work group (i.e. among actors playing roles).
Another paradigm to deal with non-prescriptive or non
imperative processes is provided by conversation models. The
latter are based on the speech act theory and on the principle
that each sentence expressed by someone represents an
intention, a commitment [28]. For instance, the Action model
[29] defines a structure to represent the conversation
relationship between two participants, customer and performer.
The type of process models addressed in [30], [31], [32] is
based on the decision-oriented paradigm according to which
the successive transformations of the product are considered as
consequences of decisions. The underlying paradigm is that a
process model does not have only to specify the linking of
activities or product states but also the intention behind the
execution of activities and their ordering at the run time.
Decision-oriented models guide the decision making process
that shapes the business and thus help reasoning about the
rationale of decisions [33]. This paradigm seems to be the
particularly appropriate for representing processes requiring
flexibility.
This paradigm does not require modeling the process
control flow in advance and allows alternative strategies to be
considered.
B. Variability
In [34][35] the concept of configurable process has been
presented and the modeling formalism to deal with process
configurability at multiple perspectives is defined. Namely the
authors present the Configurable Integrated EPC (C-iEPC)
modeling notation that extends the well-known Event Process
Chain (EPC) notation and addresses the process configurability
along the control-flow, data, and resource perspectives.
According to this approach, “Given a configurable process
model, analysts are able to define a configuration of this model
by assigning values to its variation points based on a set of
requirements. Once a configuration is defined, the model can
be individualized automatically.”
In [26] the method for Declarative Configurable process
specifications (DeCo) is presented. This method defines an
extension to BPMN [36] graphical notation and identifies
three types of relations between roles: synonym, alternative
and specialization.
C. Roles and Actors
The concept of Role is closely related to the concept of
Actor in modeling methodologies. Various definitions of
Actors and Roles can be found in literature. The most common
definition states that an Actor specifies a Role played by a user
or any other system that interacts with the subject [37]. In I*
[19], actors are considered as “active entities that carry out
actions to achieve goals by exercising their know-how and
could be composed of Agents, Roles and Positions, each of
which is an actor in a more specialized sense”. OPF [38] gives
another definition of an actor (a producer) which is “a core
abstract method component that models someone or something
that performs work units” (produces work products or provides
services).
Several attempts have been made to introduce the concept
of Role in the MAP notation [39][23]. In [39], the MAP metamodel has been extended with the concept of Indicator.
Indicators are used to help decision-making in the navigation
through a process map. A typology of indicators was defined
based on well-known project characteristics (for instance the
cost, the duration, the formality degree, and so on). This
indicator typology includes a particular indicator, which
represents the Expert role. This indicator is used to define
which roles are linked to each executable services of a map.
However, this information, even if it helps the guidance
through a map, doesn’t give the user enough information about
the variability inherent to the role concept. For instance, it
cannot be used to know if a specific expert role is related to
other expert roles in the project.
In [23] the concept of Role has been added to the MAP
meta-model in order to support the “operationalization” of
MAP process models. Namely, this concept provides an
explicit relation between an intentional process perspective
captured by MAP process model and its organizational
perspectives described by a business process. Enhancing the
MAP notation using the role concept also allowed us to
explicitly link navigation guidelines associated to a map with
the roles executing them. Namely, for the intention selection
and the strategy selection guidelines, the role taking the
navigation decisions can be specified. For the intention
achievement guidelines, the role executing the corresponding
section in the map can be specified. The third capability added
to the MAP notation thanks to the role was the possibility to
deal with non-structured processes as suggested previously in
[27]. While improving the traceability between different
process perspectives, the extended MAP process model
presented in [23] provides little guidance for process users and
does not enable process customizations.
The purpose of this work is to enhance the concept of Role
in MAP and to provide the mechanisms for (i) expressing role
variability and (ii) role configuration. These mechanisms will
improve the guidance on maps taking into account all the role
relationships present in the project.
III. APPLYING MAP TO CASE MANAGEMENT
PROCESS MODELING
A. Example: The Mortgage Approval Process
In this paper we consider an example of processing a
mortgage claim as defined by different financial institutions in
the USA. The information provided below results from our
study of multiple information sources (e.g. http://www.
homebuyinginstitute.com/, http://www.mortgage-resourcecenter.com/, http://homebuyereducation.bankofamerica.com/,
http://www.homeloancenter.com/ etc.). It represents a
compilation of guidelines, recommendations, and descriptions
of the Mortgage Approval Process, provided by different loan
consulting firms, financial advisors, and banks, available on the
web.
A mortgage is a loan for buying a house. On the USA
market, there exist various mortgages that will be appropriate
for special situations such as bad credit loans, first time
homebuyer, etc. The terms and length of the mortgages are
negotiable and can be adapted for the applicant’s situation.
The mortgage approval process can be divided into the
following steps:
1. Pre-qualification
2. Formal application
3. Document review
4. Pre-approval
5. Property appraisal
6. Final Approval
7. Closing
The goal of the pre-qualification step is to determine the
potential mortgage amount that the applicant is eligible for.
The purpose of the formal application is to provide the lender
with a package of documents characterizing in details the
current financial situation (assets) of the applicant as well as
his/her employment and credit history. Document review
follows the formal application and may include the preapproval step. The pre-approval letter issued as a result of a
pre-approval indicates that a thorough analysis of the
applicant’s credit, income, and assets has been completed and
that the applicant is pre-approved by a lender for a specific
loan amount. Being optional, this letter, however, may
represent a valuable negotiation instrument for an applicant
while searching for a property. When the applicant selects the
property, the potential mortgage lender initiates the Property
appraisal. The result of the appraisal defines the amount of the
mortgage and a corresponding down payment that has to be
paid by the applicant. The lender makes “approve”, “not
approve”, or “approve with conditions” final decisions based
on the document review and the appraisal results. If the loan is
approved, a commitment letter is issued for the applicant, and
a closing date is set up. Closing (also called settlement) is a
final step. During the mortgage closing, the mortgage lenders
will purchase the house and hold the title, as the applicant
makes payments to them.
Pre-qualification and Pre-approval are compulsory steps;
Pre-approval and Property appraisal can be considered as parts
of a Document review and serve as a baasis for the Final
approval.
Below, we illustrate how this processs can be modeled
using the MAP meta-model.
B. The MAP meta-model
Goal modeling is an effective wayy for identifying
requirements of software systems by focusing on
understanding the intentions of the involvedd stakeholders [40]
[41] and the process model MAP is an exammple of goal model
that has been conceived to meet this challenge. A map
expression provides a synthetic view of thhe variability of a
process in a relatively easy to understand wway. Variations are
revealed in two ways, by the gradual movement down the
different levels of a top map, and byy the alternative
strategies/paths available at a given mapp level [42]. The
intentional MAP meta-model has been intrroduced in the IS
engineering domain [21] and validated iin several fields:
requirement engineering [43], method eengineering [44],
enterprise knowledge development [45] andd process modeling
[21].
The map corresponding to the mortgage aappraisal process is
presented in Fig. 1.
Figure 1. High level map of the Mortgage Approval Prrocess and Refinement
map of the section A of this map
A map is a diagram composed of nodes and edges. Nodes
are intentions to realize and edges are strateggies to reach these
intentions. An edge enters a noode if its associated strategy can
be used to achieve the target inntention (the given node). Since
there can be multiple edges enntering a node, a map is able to
represent multiple ways to achieve an intention.
Fig.1 (a) represents a Higgh-level map of the mortgage
approval process defined in thee previous section. There are two
intensions specified on this leveel: Define Mortgage Application
and Approve Mortgage Appliccation. The former intention is
realized when the Formal application is completed and
validated (steps 1 and/or 2 of thhe example); the latter is realized
when Final Approval decision is made (step 6 of the example).
The final intention (Stop) corresponds to the process
termination and can be realizedd either by Closing the mortgage
(in case of a positive approval ddecision) (step 7) or by rejection
of the mortgage claim otherwise.
Fig.2 shows the MAP model using the UML formalism.
The key element of a map is aa section. A section represents a
triplet: a source intention, a ttarget intention, and a strategy
linking these source and target intentions. The section
corresponds to a process of achhieving the target intention from
a specific situation following aa particular strategy. In Fig.1 (a)
the triplet <Define Mortgage appplication, By complete revision
with pre-approval, Approve moortgage application> represents
a section that can be interrpreted as follows: when the
application has been completedd and validated, the process can
continue to its final approval ffollowing the complete revision
with a pre-approval intermediatte step.
linked to
target source
path thread
1..* 1..* 1..*
bundle
refers follows
Figure 2. MAAP meta-model
Three kinds of relationships are defined for sections:
thread, path and bundle.
A thread relationship represents the possibility to achieve a
target intention from the source intention following several
different paths (defined by a different strategy). Each of these
paths can be seen as a section in the map. Multiple strategies
leading to an intension describe multiple ways to realize this
intension. On the High-level map shown in Fig.1 (a), the
Approve Mortgage Application intention can be realized either
by complete document revision, which include Document
review (step 3) and Property Appraisal (step 5) or by complete
revision with Pre-approval (steps 3-4-5).
A path relationship represents the precedence (or the order)
between sections. We say that one section succeeds (precedes)
another if and only if the source (target) intention of the former
is the target (source) intention of the latter. There is absolutely
no path predefined as the engineer constructs his own path
following the situation at hand. Given the thread and the path
relationships, an intention can be achieved by several
combinations of sections. In our example, the mortgage lender
can navigate through the map presented in Fig.1 (a) in order to
approve a mortgage. Several paths are possible, e.g. the
application can be submitted directly or following the prequalification procedure first; approval can be granted without
the pre-approval step or with the latter, etc.
A bundle relationship shows the possibility for several
sections having the same source and target intentions to be
mutually exclusive. (Mutual exclusion is depicted by dashed
lines in a map). In Fig. 1 (a) the strategy “By closing” linking
the Approve Mortgage Application intention to the terminal
intention Stop represents a bundle relationship. It combines two
sections that are mutually exclusive: either the closing is done
in escrow or face-to-face.
A section in a map may be refined with another map using
the refinement relationship. Refinement is an abstraction
mechanism by which a complex assembly of sections at level
i+1 is viewed as a unique section at level i. This relationship
introduces levels in the process representation as each map
may be represented as a hierarchy of maps. Fig.1 (b) represents
the refinement of a section of the high level map illustrated in
Fig.1 (a) and provides more details on Final Approval process
of a mortgage application.
When a section cannot be refined any further, an
Executable Service that fulfills the intention may operationalize
it. It implies the transformation of the product under
development with the execution of a service (which can be a
guideline, a workflow, an algorithm, a business process model,
etc.).
A map specifies one ‘Intention Selection Guideline’ (ISG)
per each intention I i , except for ‘Stop’ intention. Given an
intention I i , an ISG identifies the set of intentions {I j } that can
be achieved in the next step and proposes arguments to select
one of them. There is also one ‘Strategy Selection Guideline’
(SSG) per intentions pair <I i ,I j >. Given two Intentions I i , I j and
a set of possible strategies S ij1 , S ij2 , ..S ijn applicable to I j , the
associated SSG guides the selection of a S ijk . We can say that
ISGs and SSGs describe the know-how of a domain in socalled decision process chunks [23].
IV. EXTENDING MAP FOR ROLE AND ROLE
VARIABILITY MODELING
Enabling multiple strategic choices, the MAP specification
does not provide enough information for realization of these
choices. One of the recurrent problems is the role assignment.
As specified in DeCo [1], synonyms, alternatives,
optional/obligatory process elements and hierarchies of
elements defined by generalization/specialization relations
provide a mechanism for modeling process variability. The
configuration rules, on the other hand, support the
configuration of variants based on the situation.
In this work we apply these mechanisms to model
variability of roles in maps. In our example, the roles
associated with the Mortgage Approval Process can vary not
only from country to country and from one bank to another
following theirs internal policies, but also from one agency to
another within one bank (e.g. based on the size of this agency).
Whereas some sections of an abstract mortgage process
illustrated in Fig 1(a) can be assigned to abstract actors (e.g.
Mortgage lender), concrete role assignments for the refined
Mortgage Approval Process (Fig. 1(b)) may depend on the
financial institution: small banks have only several (2-4) roles
associated with the process, whereas in big agencies the
application processing and decision making is more likely to be
assigned to a number of different roles with different
responsibilities. As our study shows, the same responsibility
can also be performed by several roles or delegated from one
role to another according to some internal rules.
As a result, different actors may be required/available to
execute the Mortgage Approval Process. Thus, to provide the
efficient guidance for both administration and personnel of a
bank, an explicit specification of roles, relations between them
(e.g. hierarchy, alternatives or possible replacements, and
synonyms) is required.
A. Enhanced MAP concepts
Role variability is important in the real life process
descriptions: in the organizations the same responsibilities are
often associated to multiple roles, at the same time, some role
names can have double meaning depending on the project or
process. Thus, the process gets overloaded with exceptions and
becomes extremely complex providing little support and
guidance. To get more practical value, the explicit specification
of roles, their relations and rules of role configuration/
assignment is required.
Figure 3 represents an extended meta-model of MAP and
includes the following concepts: Role, Relations between roles,
and Role Configuration Rule. These concepts enable a
mechanism for modeling role variability in MAP process
models. Variability of roles in business process models is a
mechanism to address the organizational complexity. It was
discussed in [35].
Start
uses
linked to uses
target source
*
1..* Map
* * refine 0..1
bundle
refers follows
Executable
Service made by
*
is executed by
relation
apply
*
Figure 3. Enhanced MAP meta-model
A role is the definition of an organizational intention shared
by a number of actors [46]. Role can be identified with a set of
responsibilities and can be fulfilled by one or several actors in
the organization. Loan consultant, Loan officer, and Appraisal
agent – are examples of roles.
In the enhanced MAP meta-model, the concept of role is
specialized into individual role and group role. For example,
Loan Consultant is an individual role whereas a Loan
Processor is a group role. A group role contains several
individual roles.
As in [26] [1], we define three types of relations between
roles: Synonym, Alternative and Configuration.
Role configuration expresses possible instantiation of a
generic role into configured roles. For instance, the Mortgage
Lender may be configured into several other roles, as the Loan
Consultant, the Loan processor, the Closing Agent and so on.
Within a configuration, different roles can be related via
synonym or alternative relations.
Synonym relation expresses the fact that a specific role can
be found in different organizations/processes under different
names while still encapsulating the same set of responsibilities
(i.e. this role has “synonyms”). For example, in the Mortgage
Approval Process, the Loan Consultant role is a synonym to
the Loan Broker role. Thus, during the process instantiation,
both roles can be assigned to the same actor.
Alternative relation expresses the fact that, under specific
conditions, the responsibilities associated with one role can be
fulfilled by another role (or delegated to it). For example, if the
local agency does not have its own Appraisal agent, an
External Appraisal agent can be recruited to perform the
property appraisal task. Along those lines, the role of the Loan
Processor, that performs an application revision and decision
making, can be fulfilled by a Loan Broker (for the smaller
agencies).
We associate the executable service supporting a map
section to one or several roles. This captures the knowledge
about which tasks can be taken by which role and offers a
better guidance of the map execution. The executable service
(i.e. a business process chunk [23], a method chunk [42]...)
encapsulates a process knowledge specified in the
organizational layer (by answering what, who, when, where
and how questions).
B. Modeling the Role hierarchy for Mortgage
Approval Process
Figure 4. Role hierarchy and relations between roles in Mortgage Approval
Process
Figure 4 illustrates the hierarchy of Roles defined in
Mortgage Approval Process. The roles are modeled as
rectangles (following the UML notation) with the name in the
upper compartment.
A rectangle with thick outline and the "C" in the right
corner is a “compact” notation that refers to a role that can be
further configured in the process model based on the situation
or context. We envisage integrating the Role element into the
MAP notation using this compact representation. For
convenience, the configuration details can be shown on a
separate diagram as represented in Fig.4.
In our example, the abstract role Mortgage lender combines
a set of complementary and possibly overlapping
responsibilitie. These responsibilities can be fulfilled by a
single actor or shared by a group of actors, giving a rise to
more specific roles: Loan Consultant, Loan Processor,
Underwriter, etc.
In the diagram representing the details of role
configuration, we define another two types of relations
between roles: Synonym relation, depicted by a dashed line
with a tag “syn” and Alternative relation, ddepicted by a solid
line with a tag “alt”. These relations refleect the policies of
organization and are used to explicitly deescribe “who does
what” based on the concrete context.
Namely, the synonym relation refers to tthe fact that in the
context of a given process, two roles have abbsolutely the same
responsibilities. Thus, they can be defined innterchangeably (for
different organizations for example). In ouur example, Loan
Broker and Loan Officer roles are synonnyms of the Loan
Consultant role as within the mortgage apprroval process they
fulfill the same responsibilities.
The alternative relation refers to the sittuations when the
responsibilities of one role can be delegateed to another role,
otherwise not having those responsibilities. In our example in
Fig.4, Loan Processor role has an alternative - the Loan officer
role. This alternative is bounded by a condiition R1 (depicted
with a shaded circle) meaning that whenevver the number of
agents in the local agency is less thenn 6 persons, the
responsibilities in the Mortgage approval process normally
fulfilled by a Loan Processor can (will) be ffulfilled by a Loan
Officer.
Along those lines, External Appraisal Agent and State
Attorney are alternative roles for the bank AAppraisal agent and
Attorney respectively. These alternatives can be activated
whenever their corresponding roles insidde the bank are
unavailable.
We emphasize here that all the considereed relations can be
defined for a given process only, e.g. whereas for one process
two roles can be considered as synonyms, ffoor another process
this will not necessarily be the case as the sets of
responsibilities fulfilled by the same rolee within different
processes might be different.
We specify configuration rules for the rolle diagram. These
rules define the conditions when the synonnym or alternative
relation between roles can be activated; theyy can be expressed
in a form of a predicate evaluating to Truue if condition is
satisfied at a given context of False otherwisse. In our example
depicted in Fig. 4 the Rule R1 describess a condition for
activating alternative relation: it states thaat the number of
agency employees should be less than 6 in orrder to activate the
alternative relation between the Loan Proocessor and Loan
Officer roles. Otherwise, in a bigger agenccy, the documents
revision should not be delegated to a Loan Offficer.
Fig.5 illustrates other examples of rules tthat can be used to
configure the roles: the availability of a givven role in the real
environment, geographical location of an aggency – these and
many other factors can affect the configurattion of the process
model, in particular imposing the role and acttors configuration.
R1 # agents < 66
Figure 5. Role configuration rule exammples
Configuration rules can bbe defined on the level of a
company, its country divisioon, and/or its local branch or
agency.
The extended map with thee role specifications is illustrated
in Fig. 6.
Figure 6. Mortgage approoval process enhanced maps
The upper part of the figuree depicts the high level view on
the Mortgage Approval Processs. The section A represents the
process of our interest – the Moortgage approval as executed by
a Bank. This section is asssigned to the abstract role of
Mortgage Lender.
The bottom part of Fig. 6 rrepresents the refinement of this
section and can be interpreted aas follows:
The mortgage application ccan be made either by following
a pre-qualification process or by directly making an
appointment in a bank (we caall it “a personal contact”). The
Loan Consultant is a role ressponsible for guiding the client
through both of these processess. After the formal application is
completed, the document reviiew process is initiated by the
mortgage lender; this process cconsists of several steps and can
be accomplished following diffferent paths. The pre-approval of
the mortgage is assigned to a ssingle role (the Loan Processor).
The final approval should be caarried out by the Loan Processor
and should be accompanied byy the property appraisal process
carried out by the Appraisall agent. There are three roles
assigned for the closing processs. Grateful
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
This paper proposes a mechanism to model roles and role
variability in the intentional meta-model MAP. Namely, we
extended the MAP notation with the concepts of Roles,
Relations between roles, and introduced the Role Configuration
Rules (formalization of these concepts will be addressed in our
future publications).
The proposed mechanism enables a better guidance and
navigation on maps as each process step can be defined for
specific roles only. The number of proposed alternatives to
navigate through the map is then reduced to the steps
compatibles with the user role.
We illustrated our modeling process on the example of the
Mortgage Approval process as defined in the USA banks (the
simplified specification has been considered). The Mortgage
approval process is an example of Case Management process.
As shown in [26], modeling this process using traditional
imperative modeling style can be difficult if at all possible. In
this paper we demonstrated the advantages of intentional
modeling using MAP enriched with role modeling mechanism.
The first advantage is that the main user (the mortgage lender
in our example) has a perfect view of the stakeholders involved
into processes. The second advantage is that the resulting
model allows us to anticipate variations of context (e.g.
different bank agencies having different distribution of
responsibilities between employees) while managing the model
complexity.
Proposed notation for modeling role variability is not
limited for MAP; as proposed in DeCo [1], it can be used to
extend another process modeling notations such as BPMN
[36].
In future, we plan to extend the notation proposed in this
work by adding cardinality constraints.