WHAT MAKES PERFECT CASE MANAGER? 1. THE To provide a common ground for our readers, we start with a definition of Case Management: OMG defines case management as “A coordinative and goal-oriented discipline, to handle cases from opening to closure, interactively between persons involved with the subject of the case and a case manager or case team”. Case man- agement processes have multiple applications, including “licensing and permitting in government, insurance application and claim processing in insurance, patient care and medical diagnosis in healthcare, mortgage processing in banking...” (OMG 2009). Navigating a spacecraft to a distant planet can make a perfect example of case management process too. Efficient case management in industry is hampered by attempts to deal with case management process the same way as with regular business process. The main feature that distinguishes case management processes from traditional business processes is their unpredictability. Unlike a business process that, once designed successfully, can function for years following a predefined scenario, case manage- ment processes have to constantly adapt to various “unknowns”. These “un- knowns” may include client situation and needs, fashion, economical and techno- logical trends, expert skills, available equipment, environmental conditions (tem- perature, humidity, pollution, radiation), etc. Here the term Adaptive Case Manage- ment (ACM) comes to play. In the literature, Adaptive Case Management discipline is often compared to Busi- ness Process Management (BPM). From the theoretical standpoint, BPM and ACM demonstrate conceptually different views on the system design. Similarly to the “chicken or egg” dilemma, they try to resolve a question about what comes first: process or data? The view adapted by BPM is process-centered; it implies that data emerges and evolves within a process according to a predefined scenario, similarly 67 A G C M : S F ? UTOMATED UIDANCE FOR ASE ANAGEMENT CIENCE OR ICTION to a product evolving on a conveyor belt. ACM view, in contrast, implies that process scenario evolves at run time in response to emerging circumstances or case-related data. Dependence on changing data and other (possibly unknown) circumstances makes automated support for case management processes extremely challenging. There- fore, the features of a case management support system often include case artifacts organizer/repository, task scheduler/allocator, report generator, document shar- ing, business calculator based on business rules etc, while definition and assess- ment of alternative scenarios and decision making remains a responsibility of a human expert – a case manager. Let’s look in detail at what makes a perfect case manager: The first characteristic we derive based on our experience and discussions with professionals is objective and well-argued reasoning. A case manager has to be well informed about the case: he/she must take into account multiple variables in order to evaluate a situation and to decide on the further case handling scenario (e.g. an activity to perform, information to request, expertise to call for etc). He should also possess a vast experience in similar cases in order to predict possible alternative scenarios and estimate their likelihood. This resumes in the second characteristic: capability to value alternatives under uncertainty. And the last characteristic we add here is capacity to learn fast turning both good and bad experience into expertise that will eventually improve quality of manager’s future decisions. HAL 9000 could probably make a perfect automated case manager but this is still fiction; what about science? 2. FICTION SCIENCE? OR We wish to assert from the beginning: no, we are NOT going to replace a case man- agement expert by a program. However, we intend to push the limits of existing case management systems so that they could guide this expert and help him/her to learn quicker and to make better decisions faster. Imagine an IT system that drives you and your team through a case like a GPS Navigator: it collects data from the different sources, identifies your current position (i.e. case status), anticipates traffic jams (i.e. resource deficiencies or other potential risks), calculates alternatives routes (i.e. case development scenarios), values them with respect to your current situation and objectives and proposes you options (i.e. set of activities) to help you in achieving your objectives with a maximum likelihood. Compared to a GPS Navigator, the Case Navigation System (Figure 1) has to process parameters and events, whose sources can vary from customer calls, social media posts, stock market feeds and traffic reports to messages from RFID and other mo- bile sensors. Due to heterogeneity and complexity of processed information, this system has to come up with much more sophisticated navigation scenarios, too. Nevertheless such a vision is far from fiction: it is grounded on the intersection of mature scientific disciplines that we are going to examine below. 68 A G C M : S F ? UTOMATED UIDANCE FOR ASE ANAGEMENT CIENCE OR ICTION Fig 1: Case Navigation System guides an expert providing him/her with a set of activities leading to a (current) objective with a maximum likelihood. Before discussing the scientific background, however, we take a closer look at the components of the Case Navigation System we propose. The logical architecture of our system follows the principles of Event-Driven Architecture (EDA), a successor of SOA. It is based on the capacity to sense the environment, produce, detect, pro- cess the events and react to these events. Dynamic Context Manager (DCM) Similar to a GPS Navigator, the Case Navigation System operates based on accurate definition of the current state (or position) of the case in its relevant coordinate system as well as its next state. Such state is defined by values of different case- related variables that can be of the two types: a) internal or controlled by the case (e.g. absolute coordinates, speed and direction of a car, generated report, calculated price, discount, offer) and b) contextual, or produced by the case environment (e.g. accidents, traffic jams, changing weather conditions, stock market fluctuation, new evidence, change of customer’s situation). The contextual variables can change spontaneously or due to external reasons; they can have mild or severe effect on the case and therefore need to be considered in order to define the case scenario. On the other hand, considering too many con- textual parameters can make the case management unbearably tough. The idea is to select, measure and monitor “right” contextual variables at the “right” case states. This is the role of dynamic context manger (or DCM) component (Figure 1). At a given time, the context variables processed by DCM plus the values of internal case variables are transmitted to the navigation manager (NM). 69 A G C M : S F ? UTOMATED UIDANCE FOR ASE ANAGEMENT CIENCE OR ICTION Navigation Manager (NM) The Navigation Manager (Figure 1) makes navigation decisions and: it determines one (or several) plausible activity to execute with respect to the current objectives conditions1. Specifically, when such a decision is required, NM and navigation takes into account the current case state, the context of the case defined by the DCM, and the available activities (i.e. what can currently be done?). It runs a pre- dictive algorithm and calculates different scenarios of case development and their possible outcomes. Eventually it selects those scenarios that will have a highest probability to result in the desired outcome. It suggests corresponding activities and their assignment to actors from the activity/resource repository (Figure 1). As an expert uses his/her intuition or previous experience to make the right guess, the accuracy of scenario/outcome predictions of the NM can be improved by using previous experience in similar cases that is stored in the Log and history compo- nent (Figure 1). Log and History This component is the memory of the case manager: it contains descriptions of scenarios of previous cases (successful or not) and can be “mined” in order to an- swer the questions “was similar situation already happen?” and if yes, “what did we do?” and “what happened next?”. Log/history mining techniques are a valuable toolkit for determining patterns in cases and predicting further development of the case under certain initial conditions. Therefore it is important to accurately record every event, decision made and activity that follows to this log at run time. This is depicted with a dashed line tagged “feedback loop” in Figure 1. Activity/Resource Repository This element represents a catalog of activities that can be performed during the case handling and resources that can be used (actors, equipment etc.). Each activ- ity is characterized by: A set of conditions under which it can be performed (e.g. when a specific • event happens, when a certain resource is available, when the value of x is greater than…etc); this set of conditions is typically called precondition. A set of conditions or outcomes that will be produced upon its termina- • tion; this is typically called postcondition. NM uses preconditions and postconditions to determine the “right” activities to per- form in the current case state. Resources are also characterized by the conditions when they can be used. For example, actors (or human resources) are described by their skills: this enables a dynamic activity-actor assignment. Activity/resource repository can be extended any time by defining new activities and adding new resources. Algorithm Following the concept of Navigation System, we represent case management pro- cess as moving in a coordinate system where each coordinate takes values of some case-specific parameter (e.g. client income, inflation rate, time of the day, availabil- ity/amount of some resource etc.). A single point or a group of points in this coordinate system corresponds to a case state (or status) at a given moment of time. We say that “the case develops” if its We consider that objectives of the case are not fixed and can change during the 1 case handling. 70 A G C M : S F ? UTOMATED UIDANCE FOR ASE ANAGEMENT CIENCE OR ICTION state changes over time. There are three types of triggers that can lead to state change: case management activities, internal events and external (contextual) events. The examples of these triggers and their corresponding state transitions are shown in Table 1. Table 1: Examples of Triggers Trigger type Trigger example and subsequent state transition External events Applicant files complementary information about his income -> clerk processes the information -> the application gains “high in- come” status and “Priority processing” state of the case is trig- gered Temperature rises above critical -> “Emergency” state of the case is triggered Interest rate of the bank changes -> “Contract re-validation” state of the case is triggered Internal activities Manager invalidates the application -> “Demand refused” state is triggered Agent (or system) recalculates discounts -> “Contract re-valida- tion” state of the case is triggered Team executes an emergency operation procedure and reduces the temperature -> “Normal operating” state is triggered. Internal events Contract validity date has expired -> “Contract re-validation” state is triggered “Out of stock” reminder is generated by the system -> value of the corresponding “resource amount” variable is changed to “0”. The case management can be seen as navigating from one state to another, aiming to achieve some case objectives (a target state). The functionality of our Case Navigation System can be summarized in the follow- ing abstract algorithm: 1. Select the relevant case-specific parameters, observe and measure them and identify the current case state (DCM + NM); 2. Identify probable scenarios (sequences of states) taking into account, if possi- ble, previous experience (NM + Log&History); 3. Exclude the scenarios that are forbidden or not feasible for the current case according to business rules, regulations, availability of resources etc. (NM); 4. Select the scenarios that can lead the case towards its target state with the highest probability (NM); 5. Identify one or several alternative activities that trigger such successful sce- narios and recommend them to the case manager (NM + Repository); 6. Record the case manager’s decision (Log&History). The algorithm above should be repeated in a cycle, and can be triggered by a case manager requiring an assistance; • by DCM, after registering some potentially important contextual or inter- • nal event. SCIENTIFIC BACKGROUND 3. The idea of automated guidance for ACM is grounded on the intersection of several scientific disciplines. In particular, we propose to explore formal methods, formal concept analysis (FCA) and dynamic context modeling. Table 2 shows the steps of the algorithm for the Case Navigation System presented 71 A G C M : S F ? UTOMATED UIDANCE FOR ASE ANAGEMENT CIENCE OR ICTION above and indicates the research challenges and theoretical background for imple- menting these steps. Table 2: Theoretical Foundations required for Case Navigation System Step System Ele- Scientific Objectives ment DCM + NM Research objectives: Dynamic model of the Select the relevant context; Representation, capturing and pro- case-specific param- cessing of complex internal and contextual eters, measure them events; Rules for inclusion/exclusion context and identify the cur- subjects/elements into consideration; Formal rent case state Specification of case coordinate system. Disciplines: Dynamic context modeling; Com- plex Even Processing; Formal specification languages. NM + Log&His- Research objectives: Rules for state transi- Identify probable tory tions; Specification of case objectives, final scenarios (sequences states and case management scenarios; Dis- of states) taking into covery of the case abstract states and case account, if possible, management scenarios from the log and his- previous experience tory. Disciplines: Formal specification languages; Process mining; Formal Concept Analysis NM Research objectives: Formal specification of Exclude those sce- business rules; simulation and validation the narios that are not case scenarios against these rules; feasible/forbidden for current case (i.e. Disciplines: Formal specification languages business rules, regu- and model checking. lations, availability of resources) NM Research challenges: Identification of the best Select the scenarios next state given the current state; that can lead the case towards its tar- Disciplines: Graph analysis; Formal Concept get state with maxi- Analysis mum probability NM + Repository Research objectives: Specification of activities Identify one or sev- (preconditions + postconditions) and re- eral alternative activ- sources; Identification of the activities that ities that lead to lead to required state transition with the such successful sce- maximum likelihood; narios and recom- mend them to the Disciplines: Formal specification languages; case manager Formal Concept Analysis Record the case NM + Log&His- - manager’s decision tory Formal Concept Analysis (FCA) Automated guidance for ACM proposed in this paper depends heavily on the sys- tems capability to analyze, look for dependencies and classify vast amount of data considering the case, its context, states, log and history. Navigation system also has to efficiently predict the successful scenarios and recommend to a user some course of actions based on a certain criteria. Formal Concept Analysis discipline proposes a set of methods and tool for such data processing and predictive ana- lytics. 72 A G C M : S F ? UTOMATED UIDANCE FOR ASE ANAGEMENT CIENCE OR ICTION FCA is a mathematical theory relying on the use of formal contexts and Galois lat- tices (Birkhoff 1940). The use of Galois lattices to describe a relation between two sets has led to various classification methods: a Galois lattice gathers elements, which have common properties in clusters, called formal concepts. A partial order exists among these concepts, which form a lattice with an upper and a lower bound. Since their creation, Galois lattices have been used in numerous contexts to extract hidden knowledge from data. Formal concept analysis provides a universal tool for clustering the objects as well it can be used as underlying semantics for a recommenders system, providing a selected subset of elements that correspond to a certain criteria. Its joint use with formal methods and context modeling is very promising in the context of case man- agement. Dynamic context modeling The main characteristic that distinguishes Adaptive Case Management from Busi- ness Process Management is its dependency from the complex events and contex- tual parameters. The more complete information we have about the case context the more accurate the decision we can make about what to do next (Vanrompay 2011). However, too many contextual parameters can make the case management unbearably tough. Designing a context model that will adapt to the case needs by dynamically including new relevant parameters into the consideration and exclud- ing the irrelevant ones – is an important endeavor for efficient Case Navigation Sys- tem. The process context information should be acquired, modeled and formally ana- lyzed at run time in order to adapt case handling scenario and to ensure its flexi- bility (Bettini 2010). Most context models consider a subject or a number of sub- jects (e.g. a person, a physical or information object, a phenomenon etc.). Each subject can be associated with multiple context elements (location, status, etc.); for each context element, we observe values that can dynamically change and that can be described by meta-data. Both subject and context elements can be semantically described using ontologies. The subjects/elements present in a current context model depend on the activity domain related to our case. An important advantage provided by dynamic context modeling is a possibility to add/remove subjects and elements to/from the context model at run time. Complex Event Processing (CEP) Capturing and processing complex events in business organizations have been re- cently addressed by Complex Event Processing (CEP) discipline (Luckham 2011) (Bates 2012). The goal of CEP is to handle the streams of information from different sources, to identify meaningful events and to respond to them as quickly as possi- ble. Complex events can emerge at different layers of an organization and can com- bine various simpler events such as customer calls, messages, social media posts, stock market feeds, traffic reports, weather reports, etc. Integration of the CEP tech- nology into BPM has a great potential (Janiesch 2011) as it can result in develop- ment of decision-support systems and other recommendation systems for efficient business process management. Detection-oriented CEP is a class of CEP solutions focused on identification of pat- tern situations from combinations or sequences of events. Complemented by dy- namic context modeling for run-time definition of complex contextual events and by FCA for identification and evaluation of case handling scenarios that can follow 73 A G C M : S F ? UTOMATED UIDANCE FOR ASE ANAGEMENT CIENCE OR ICTION a detected pattern situation, detection-oriented CEP represent a valuable technol- ogy for automated ACM. Formal Methods Process modeling (graphical or formal) prior to its implementation is important since it helps to understand and communicate the meaning of the process. Formal modeling (or specification) is yet more beneficial: it allows a process designer to check if a given process meets specific conditions, respects (business) rules and if it can result in desired outcome. Formal specification of a case management process assumes definition of the coor- dinate system, abstract states and conditions that trigger the state transitions dur- ing a case handling. This specification can be done using a formal specification language and further validated using formal methods. In computer science, formal methods are a particular kind of mathematically based techniques for the specification, development and verification of software and hard- ware systems (Clarke 1996). The examples of formal methods include Z notation, B-method, Alloy specification language etc. Formal methods can be used for step-wise system design: they provide a formal specification of the system to be developed at different levels of details and allow for accurate refinement (transition from one level to another). The resulting formal specification can be used to verify that the requirements for the system being de- veloped have been completely and accurately specified. Along those lines, formal methods can be used to verify that the proposed case-handling scenario meets the objectives of the organization while respecting the contracts and regulations asso- ciated with it. 4. DISCUSSION The vision presented above results from an academic research of our group and its implementation only begins. Our objective is to extend the capability of ACM sup- porting systems and to transform them from useful assistants to experienced guides and reliable advisors. While trying to answer the question “what makes a perfect case manager?” we high- lighted the following characteristics: objective and well-argued reasoning; • capability to value alternatives under uncertainty; • capacity to learn fast from the experience. • The Case Navigation System pictured above focuses on these characteristics: dy- namic context manager supports objective and well-argued reasoning about the case; thanks to predictive scenario calculation and mining of previous scenarios, accurate predictions about case development can be made by NM; thanks to regis- tered log and history, scenarios can be improved in the future. So what? This is probably the main question that bothers a reader during the last couple of pages. Could these ideas, which look like a mixture between good imagination and scientific terminology, leave the research lab one day? We will try to answer this question. Our group works in collaboration with other researchers in order to provide solid theoretical foundations, algorithms and working prototypes for the Case Navigation System depicted in this article. First, we are going to create models and algorithms for a generic system, which does not consider any concrete application domain. The 74 A G C M : S F ? UTOMATED UIDANCE FOR ASE ANAGEMENT CIENCE OR ICTION next step is to create a prototype of the Navigation System for a concrete domain (e.g. banking, insurance, administration, legislative etc.). The prospective prototype, however, cannot be considered a working system until it is simulated, validated and tested on multiple, first, toy and then, real life exam- ples. Simulation and validation phase will be followed by the learning phase, where the algorithms will be tuned based on the existing cases. This will potentially im- prove their accuracy. These research and development activities are summarized in Figure 2. Figure 2: Research and development activities for the Case Navigation System Challenges The main challenges we have to face can be roughly divided in three categories: Theoretical challenges related to overall problem complexity and number • of “unknowns” to manage. Technological challenges (e.g. scalability and robustness of algorithms, • availability and quality of appropriate ICT technologies) Challenges related to adoption by the users (e.g. user perception of com- • plexity versus utility, appreciation and willingness to adopt). We give some examples related to our scientific objectives first: In spite of their effectiveness, approaches based on a formal semantics, model checking and theorem proving are rarely used in practice due to their complexity and high implementation cost. Indeed, formal specification languages are typically based on first or higher order logic: reduction of a real life problem (i.e. a case and its handling) to a logical formula represents a complex task and requires specific skills from a designer. So far, formal methods have been successfully used in design and development of safety critical systems. The main critique of the approaches based on Formal Concept Analysis is related to their scalability. Computation and update of Galois lattices are complex tasks, especially if the input data is large and evolves frequently. This can be seen as a serious drawback in development of automated guidance for ACM. To cope with this problem, several approaches based on filtering techniques have been proposed. Recent works demonstrate a possibility to generate Galois lattice from a data stream in real-time. In particular, some tools like FCA Stream Miner tool (Melo 2013), which implement this approach, have been successfully used for anomaly detection in telemetry data. Scalability of context acquisition platforms can be pointed out as an issue for con- text-aware ACM. Indeed, the DCM component of the Case Navigation System de- scribed above needs to observe an important number of elements, identify and han- dle complex business events. This potentially involves connecting multiple distrib- uted information sources. Recent solutions developed in the fields of pervasive sys- tems and sensor networks demonstrate that it is possible to handle hundreds of sensors for observing context information. Another critical challenge is related to the heterogeneity of contextual information: the DCM component has to deal with a multi-scale context, where information can 75 A G C M : S F ? UTOMATED UIDANCE FOR ASE ANAGEMENT CIENCE OR ICTION range from simple coordinates coming from a GPS to complex client or market de- scriptions coming from cloud platforms, social networks, RFIDs and personal mo- bile devices. Such heterogeneous information has to be represented using multiple scales, demanding expressive models. This is an ongoing issue considered by nu- merous research teams. Complex Event Processing addresses the issues related to handling multiple heterogeneous information sources. The problems described above mostly illustrate the theoretical challenges. Regard- ing the technological and adoption challenges we refer to Gartner’s Hype cycle. Fig- It evaluates the ure 3 illustrates the Hype cycle for emerging technologies for 20132 maturity, adoption and future direction for technologies and trends and helps us to illustrate some technological challenges. In particular, the Hype cycle from 2013 highlights the evolving relationships between humans and machines. According to this research, Predictive Analytics technologies already reached their plateau of productivity phase and are currently becoming the mainstream technology. Com- plex-Event Processing and Content Analytics technologies that also pave the road to context-aware ACM are currently on their peak of inflated expectations phase, meaning that the value of these technologies is not yet correctly estimated and their reputation is grounded on both success and failure stories. According to Gartner, both Content Analytics and CEP technologies will reach their maturity (the plateau) in 5 to 10 years (Figure 3). Figure 3: Gartner’s Hype Cycle for emerging technologies in 2013. The passage from the purely theoretical Case Navigation System described in this article to a concrete system that deals with a real life example presents a whole set of new challenges. We highlight just two of them: To select the right level of granularity, we have to identify relevant in- • ternal and contextual parameters that will affect the produced recommen- dations and determine case scenarios. This task is not easy even for a professional case manager with years of experience. The main risk is to (Source: Gartner, August 2013 http://www.gartner.com/newsroom/id/2575515). 2 76 A G C M : S F ? UTOMATED UIDANCE FOR ASE ANAGEMENT CIENCE OR ICTION get the system that is either too naïve (abstracts away too many parame- ters and produces only trivial recommendations) or too complex (produces scenarios and recommendations impossible to decipher or validate). To specify and further improve the system logic, we have to collect a • substantial amount of data on case management history (past cases). Un- fortunately, organizations often do not collect such history. Even if they do - very rarely they keep trace in a standard format that can be easily re- used/understood. In this paper, we presented the concept of Case Navigation System, which is grounded on academic research of our group. Our idea is to extend the capabilities of ACM supporting systems of today and to transform them from useful assistants to experienced guides and reliable advisors. Though a perspective of having fully automated case management sounds like science fiction and we are still far from inventing HAL 9000, some exciting functionalities such as context-aware scenario prediction and evaluation can be envisioned.